There are many basic data structures that can be used to solve application problems. Array is a good static data structure that can be accessed randomly and is fairly easy to implement. Linked Lists on the other hand is dynamic and is ideal for application that requires frequent operations such as add, delete, and update. One drawback of linked list is that data access is sequential. Then there are other specialized data structures like, stacks and queues that allows us to solve complicated problems (eg: Maze traversal) using these restricted data structures. One other data structure is the hash table that allows users to program applications that require frequent search and updates. They can be done in O(1) in a hash table.

One of the disadvantages of using an array or linked list to store data is the time necessary to search for an item. Since both the arrays and Linked Lists are linear structures the time required to search a “linear” list is proportional to the size of the data set. For example, if the size of the data set is n, then the number of comparisons needed to find (or not find) an item may be as bad as some multiple of n. So imagine doing the search on a linked list (or array) with n = 106 nodes. Even on a machine that can do million comparisons per second, searching for m items will take roughly m seconds. This not acceptable in today’s world where speed at which we complete operations is extremely important. Time is money. Therefore it seems that better (more efficient) data structures are needed to store and search data.
